---
title: "Thinking about the needy, justice, and international organizations"
author: "Larry S. Temkin"
entry_type: "article"
year: 2004
journaltitle: "The Journal of Ethics"
volume: "8"
---

This article has three main parts. Part One considers the nature and extent to which individuals who are well-off have a moral obligation to aid the world’s needy. Drawing on a pluralistic approach to morality, which includes con- sequentialist, virtue-based, and deontological elements, it is contended that most who are well-off should do much more than they do to aid the needy, and that they are open to serious moral criticism if they simply ignore the needy. Part One also focuses on the United States, and illustrates both how incredibly wealthy the U.S. is and some of the spending habits of its citizens; however, its considerations apply to the well-off generally. Part Two considers whether justice provides reasons for helping the needy. Noting that justice is an extremely complex notion, it discusses numerous considerations relevant to justice’s scope and implications, including an extended Rawlsian conception of justice, an absolute conception, a comparative conception, the distinction between natural and social justice, and various elements of common-sense morality. Part Two also distinguishes between agent-relative jus- tice-based reasons, which are relevant to whether we act justly, and agent-neutral justice-based reasons, which are relevant to whether we have reasons of justice for acting. Correspondingly, it argues that even if one can ignore the needy without acting unjustly, as philosophers like Robert Nozick and Jan Narveson contend, there may be powerful reasons of justice for addressing their plight. Part Three briefly address the responsibilities of international organizations like the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and World Trade Organization (WTO). Drawing on Part Two, it is suggested that in addition to standard reasons to act justly towards needy members of the world’s community, there will be reasons of justice for such organizations to aid the needy in both present, and future, genera- tions. The article concludes by contending that the well-off in countries like the U.S. have reason to view international organizations like the World Bank, IMF, and WTO as their agents, and to seek to insure that they alleviate misfortunes amongst the world’s needy.
