---
title: "Identity, consciousness and value"
author: "Peter Unger"
entry_type: "book"
year: 1990
location: "Oxford"
editor: "Frank Jackson and Michael Smith"
---

This book provides a comprehensive and novel theory of consciousness. In clear and non-technical language, Christopher Hill provides interrelated accounts of six main forms of consciousness - agent consciousness, propositional consciousness (consciousness that), introspective consciousness, relational consciousness (consciousness of), experiential consciousness, and phenomenal consciousness. He develops the representational theory of mind in new directions, showing in detail how it can be used to undercut dualistic accounts of mental states. In addition he offers original and stimulating discussions of a range of psychological phenomena, including visual awareness, pain, emotional qualia, and introspection. His important book will interest a wide readership of students and scholars in philosophy of mind and cognitive science"--Provided by publisher. Summary: "This book provides a comprehensive and novel theory of consciousness. In clear and non-technical language, Christopher Hill provides interrelated accounts of six main forms of consciousness - agent consciousness, propositional consciousness (consciousness that), introspective consciousness, relational consciousness (consciousness of), experiential consciousness, and phenomenal consciousness. He develops the representational theory of mind in new directions, showing in detail how it can be used to undercut dualistic accounts of mental states. In addition he offers original and stimulating discussions of a range of psychological phenomena, including visual awareness, pain, emotional qualia, and introspection. His important book will interest a wide readership of students and scholars in philosophy of mind and cognitive science. - Provides a comprehensive theory of consciousness, identifying all of the main forms of consciousness and proposing an account for each of them - Develops the representational theory of mind in a unique way, providing a new insight for the reader - Offers detailed accounts of three types of phenomenology: visual phenomenology, somatic phenomenology and emotional phenomenology, ideal for those wishing to study this subject in depth Contents 1. Form of consciousness; 2. Theories of qualia; 3. Awareness, representation, and experience; 4. The refutation of dualism; 5. Visual awareness and visual qualia; 6. Ouch! The paradox of pain; 7. Internal weather: the metaphysics of emotional qualia; 8. Introspection and consciousness; 9. A summary, two supplements, and a look beyond.
